:;.. !

Structure Mapping in Analogy and Similarity
Dedre Gentner
Arthur B. Markman

Analogy and similarity are often assumed to be distinct
psychological processes. In contrast to this position, the
authors suggest that both similarity and analogy involve
a process of structural alignment and mapping, that is,
that similarity is like analogy. In this article, the authors
first describe the structure-mapping process as it has
been worked out for analogy. Then, this view is extended
to similarity, where it is used to generate new predictions.
Finally, the authors explore broader implications of
structural alignment for psychological processing.

A

nalogy and similarity are central in cognitive
processing. They are often viewed as quite separate: Analogy is a clever, sophisticated process
used in creative discovery, whereas similarity is a brute
perceptual process that we share with the entire animal
kingdom. This view of similarity has important implications for the: way we model human thinking, because
similarity is demonstrably important across many areas
of cognition. We store experiences in categories largely
on the basis of their similarity to a category representation or to stored exemplars (Smith & Medin, 1981). In
transfer, new problems are solved using procedures taken
from prior similar problems (Bassok, 1990; Holyoak &
Koh, 1987; Keane, 1988; Kolodner, 1993; Novick, 1988,
1990; Ross, 1987, 1989; Winston, 1980), and inferences
about people are influenced by their similarity to other
known individuals (Andersen & Cole, 1990; Read, 1984).
Even the way we respond affectively to a situation may
be based in part on our responses to previous similar
situations (Kahneman & Miller, 1986). Thus, an understanding of similarity processing may provide general
insight into human thinking.
In our research, we have taken a very different route
from the "stars above, mud below" view of analogy and
similarity. We suggest that the process of carrying out a
comparison is the same in both cases. The general idea
is summarized by the slogan "similarity is like analogy"
(Gentner & Markman, 1995; Markman & Gentner, 1993a;
Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993). We summarize recent evidence suggesting that the process involved in both
similarity and analogy comparisons is one of structural
alignment and mapping between mental representations
(Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989; Gentner, 1983,
1989; Gentner & Markman, 1993, 1994, 1995; Goldstone, 1994b; Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Goldstone,
Medin, & Gentner, 1991; Markman & Gentner, 1993a,
1993b; Medin et al., 1993). We begin with creative analogy and then tum to similarity.
January 1997 • American Psychologist
Copyright 1997 by the American Psycho1ogica1 Association, Inc. 0003-066X/97/$2.00

Vol. 52, No. I. 45-56

Northwestern University
Columbia University

Analogy
Johannes Kepler was a great discoverer and a prolific
analogizer. He was an early champion of Copernicus's
(1543/1992) proposal that the earth and other planets
moved, rather than the sun. In 1596, in the course of
trying to work out the laws of planetary motion, Kepler
found himself asking a seemingly simple question: Why
is it that the outermost planets move slower than the
innermost planets? According to the best existing models,
the planets' motion was caused by planetary spirits or
souls that impelled the planets on their courses. As Kepler
noted, one possibility was that the spirits that moved the
outer planets just happened to be weaker than the spirits
that moved the inner planets; but he proposed instead the
radical idea that there is one spirit or power emanating
from the sun that moves all the planets: that is, that the
sun causes the motion of the planets. 1 Kepler had hit
upon a major idea, an important precursor of gravity. But
there was a seemingly fatal objection. For the sun to
move the planets would require action at a distance, an
abhorrent notion to any physical scientist (including
Newton, when he developed the full theory of gravity
some 80 years later).
Kepler's response to this self-posed challenge was
to consider an analogy to light. In his Astronomia Nova
(The New Astronomy; 1609/1992), Kepler developed this
analogy between the motive power and light (see Gentner
et al., in press, for details):
But lest I appear to philosophize with excessive insolence, I
shall propose to the reader the clearly authentic example of
light, since it also makes its nest in the sun. thence to break
forth into the whole world as a companion to this motive power.

Dedre Gentner, Department of Psychology, Northwestern University;
Arthur B. Markman, Department of Psychology, Columbia University.
This work was supported by National Science Foundation (NSF)
Grant SBR-95-11757, Office of Naval Research Grant N00014-89J1272, and NSF Career Award SBR-95-10924.
We thank Doug Medin, Ken Forbus, and the Similarity and Analogy group for discussions of this work and Mark Keane, Brian Ross,
and Colleen Siefert for helpful comments on this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Dedre Gentner, Department of Psychology. Northwestern University,
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208. Electronic mail may be sent
via Internet to gentner@nwu.edu.
'This causal interpretation, which went well beyond Copernicus's
original proposal, also accounted for another regularity Kepler noted,
namely, that each individual planet moves faster in its orbit the closer
it is to the sun.

45

Dedre Gentner

Who, I ask, will say that light is something material? Nevertheless, it carries out its operations with respect to place, suffers
alteration, is reflected and refracted, and assumes quantities so
as to be dense or rare, and to be capable of being taken as a
surface wherever it falls upon something illuminable. Now just
as it is said in optics, that light does not exist in the intermediate
space between the source and the illuminable, this is equally
true of the motive power. (Astronomia Nova, p. 383)
If light can travel undetectably on its way between
the source and destination, yet illuminate its destination,
then so too could the motive force be undetectable on its
way from sun to planet, yet affect the planet's motion
once it arrives at the planet. But Kepler was not content
with a mere proof of possibility. He pushed the analogy
further. He used it to state why the motive power diminishes with distance: Just as the light from a lamp shines
brighter on near objects than on further ones, so it is
with the sun's motive power, and for the same reason:
The motive power (like the light) is not lost as it disperses
but is spread out over a greater area. Because nothing is
lost as the emission spreads from the source, Kepler
( 1609 I 1992) argued, ''The emission, then, in the same
manner as light, is immaterial, unlike odours, which are
accompanied by a diminution of substance, and unlike
heat from a hot furnace, or anything similar which fills
the intervening space" (p. 381). Here, odors and heat
are used as "near-misses" (Winston, 1980)-potential
analogs that differ with respect to the key behavior and
serve to sharpen the parallel between light and the motive
power.
Kepler's analogical model faced further challenges.
He had to explain why, given this power emanating from
the sun, the planets moved closer and further on their
orbits instead of maintaining a constant distance from
the sun. To meet these challenges, he again turned to
analogy. For example, he invoked a "boatman" analogy
to explain the in-and-out motion of the planets. He postu-

46

lated that the sun rotated around its axis, creating a
whirling circular river of motive power that pushed the
planets around. 2 Then, as a ferryman can steer his boat
(the planet) back and forth orthogonally to the river's
current, so the planets could move in and out with only
a constant sidewise current of motive power. But although
Kepler worked this analogy for decades, he was never
satisfied with it; it seemed to require a degree of sentience
on the part of the planets to sense how to steer. In another
much explored analogy, he likened the sun and planet to
two magnets that approach or repel each other depending
on which poles are proximate.
Kepler's writings demonstrate the central features
of analogy. First, analogy is a device for conveying that
two situations or domains share relational structure despite arbitrary degrees of difference in the objects that
make up the domains (Gentner, 1983). The magnet analogy, for example, will stand or fall according to whether
the causal relations between two magnets are the same
as those between the sun and planet, and not according to
the resemblance between a magnet and the sun. Common
relations are essential to analogy; common objects are
not. This promoting of relations over objects makes analogy a useful cognitive device, for physical objects are
normally highly salient in human processing-easy to
focus on, recognize, encode, retrieve, and so on.
But this is still not specific enough. There is, in
general, an indefinite number of possible relations that
an analogy could pick out (Goodman, 1972), and most
of these are ignored. For example, we may find a spiderweb and a fishing net analogous because both trap their
prey, both remain stationary while their prey enters, and
so on. But it would not contribute to the analogy to note
that "Both are smaller than the Taj Mahal," or "Both
are smaller than the Kremlin.'' How do we select which
common relations to pay attention to? The major goal of
this article is to demonstrate that the process of comparison-both in analogy and in similarity-operates so as
to favor interconnected systems of relations and their
arguments.
As the above discussion shows, to capture the process of analogy, we must make assumptions not only
about the processes of comparison, but about the nature
of typical conceptual cognitive representations and how
representations and processes interact (Palmer, 1978). In
particular, we must have a representational system that
is sufficiently explicit about relational structure to express the causal dependencies that match across the domains. We need a representational scheme capable of
expressing not only objects but also the relationships and
bindings that hold between them, including higher order
relations such as causal relations. 3 One clarification is in
2
In Kepler's pre-Newtonian physics, the sun was required to push
the planets around in their orbits, not merely to attract them.
3
Formally, the elements of our representations are objects (or entities), object descriptors (called attributes), functions (which express
dimensional information), and relations between representational elements. Attributes and relations are predicates with truth values. Functions differ from predicates in that they map from a set of arguments

January 1997 • American Psychologist

t

I

t
y

I

it

'lt
t

'

Arthur B.
Markman

order here. To discuss alignment processes, we need to
take representation seriously, but this should not be taken
to imply a commitment to any particular representation
as the best or only possible representation of a situation.
(Logically, such a position would be indefensible.)
Rather, we assume that the comparison process operates
over a person's current representations, however the~ are
derived. Thus, to predict the outcome of a comparison,
we should know the person's current psychological construal of the things being compared, including goals and
contextual information as well as long-term knowledge.

Structural Alignment View of Analogy
and Similarity
The defining characteristic of analogy is that it involves
an alignment of relational structure. There are three ~sy­
chological constraints on this alignment. First, the ahg~­
ment must be structurally consistent: In other words, 1t
must observe parallel connectivity and one-to-one cor_respondence. Parallel connectivity requires that matchmg
relations must have matching arguments, and one-to-one
correspondence limits any element in one representation
to at most one matching element in the other representation (Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1986, 1989; Gentner, 1983, 1989; Gentner & Clement, 1988; Holyoak &
Thagard, 1989). For example, in Kepler's (1609/1992)
analogy, the planet corresponds to the boat and the. su_n' s
power to the river's current, because they play stmtlar
roles in a common relational structure. This also shows
a second characteristic of analogy, namely, relational focus: As discussed above, analogies must involve common
relations but need not involve common object descriponto values other than truth values. For example, a function like color
(ball)= red may be used to represent the dimension of_ color. Th: same
assertion could be represented using color as an attnbute, as m red
(ball), or using color as a relation, as in color (ball, r~d). We assume
that how a property is represented will affect the way It IS processed.

January 1997 • American Psychologist

tions (e.g., it does not detract from the analogy that the
planet does not look like a boat). The final characteristic
of analogy is systematicity: Analogies tend to match connected systems of relations (Gentner, 1983, 1989). A
matching set of relations interconnected by higher order
constraining relations makes a better analogical match
than an equal number of matching relations that are unconnected to each other. The systematicity principle captures a tacit preference for coherence and causal predictive power in analogical processing. We_ are not ~uc_h
interested in analogies that capture a senes of comcidences, even if there are a great many of them.
.
A particularly striking example of structural dormnance in analogy is that of cross-mapping. A crossmapping is a comparison in which two analogous scenarios contain similar or identical objects that play different
relational roles in the two scenarios (Gentner & Toupin,
1986; see also Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Markman & Gentner, 1993b; Ross,
1987, 1989). A simple example of a cross-mapping is
this simple proportional analogy:
1:3::3:9.
The obvious possibility of matching the two identical 3s
is dismissed because to do so would misalign the relational roles of the terms. Instead, the object correspondences are 1 __.. 3 and 3 __.. 9, preserving the relational
commonality (the identical ratio) across the pair.
Given an alignment of structure, further inferences
can often be made from the analogy. The implicit preference for systematicity-for aligning of connected systems of knowledge-is crucial here. It is what permits
us to generate spontaneous inferences. When we have
aligned a system in the base domain with a (typically
less complete) system in the target domain, then further
statements (candidate inferences) connected to the base
system in the base can be projected into the target. These
candidate inferences are only guesses: Their factual correctness must be checked separately. This uncertainty is
appropriate: Any process capable of producing novel true
inferences is also capable of generating false inferences.
This kind of spontaneous analogical inference
abounds in Kepler's writings. He followed his initial analogy establishing that the motive power (like light). can
operate at a distance with a series of further projectiOns
(that the motive power [like light] spreads out through
space, that it becomes diffused without diminishing in
total quantity, etc.). He even asked whether it could undergo an eclipse (he decided not and used this disanalogy
to conclude that the motive power cannot be the same
thing as the sun's light).

Similarity Is Like Analogy
Kepler's analogical feats are nothing short of amazing.
Reflecting on his powers makes it clear why the ability
to form analogies has been taken as a sign of intelligence,
making the four-term analogy problem a staple of aptitude tests. But consider the following more prosaic
example:
47

Lucas, a 25-month-old child, plays with a new toy that has six
colored doors. Each door has its own key-a red key for a red
door, a blue key for a blue door, and so on. Lucas opens each
door with the key of the corresponding color. Then he sees a
seventh white key. He carefully inspects the toy from top to
bottom. Then he turns to his parents and asks, ''Where the
white door?''
Child development is full of these moments, as in the
example of Aaron's analogy from self to other discussed
in the article by Holyoak and Thagard (1997, this issue)
or this example contributed by Lise Menn (personal communication, February 1995): Her two-year-old son
watched fascinated as some pet ducklings ate. Then he
held his arms to his sides and bent down and up like the
ducklings. Finally he announced, pointing at the ducklings, "Have no hands!" He had figured out why they
ate so differently from him. These kinds of comparisonbased discoveries are so commonplace that they are
hardly noticeable as anything special, and yet they contain the same essential characteristics of analogical processing that marks Kepler's use of analogy.
In a fundamental sense, similarity is like analogy,
in that both involve an alignment of relational structure
(Gentner & Markman, 1995). The difference between
them is that in analogy, only relational predicates are
shared, whereas in literal similarity, both relational predicates and object attributes are shared. In Kepler's analogy, there is no physical resemblance between a boat on
a river and a planet revolving around the sun. In Lucas's
similarity comparison, each key and door pair is similar
to every other, making it easy for Lucas to align the pairs.
This contrast between analogy and literal similarity is in
fact a continuum, not a dichotomy. Yet it is an important
continuum psychologically, because overall similarity
comparisons are far easier to notice and map than purely
analogical comparisons, especially for novices like Lucas
(Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993; Holyoak & Koh,
1987; Keane, 1988; Ross, 1989).
Figure 1 places this distinction between analogy and
similarity within a similarity space defined by the degree
of attributional similarity and the degree of relational
similarity. Analogy occurs when comparisons exhibit a
high degree of relational similarity with very little attribute similarity. As the amount of attribute similarity increases, the comparison shifts toward literal similarity.
Mere-appearance matches share object descriptions but
not relations. For example, comparing a planet with a
round ball would constitute a mere-appearance match.
Mere-appearance matches are, in a sense, the opposite of
analogies. Such matches are of course sharply limited in
their predictive utility. Nonetheless, they are important
to consider, because they often occur among children and
other novices and may interfere with their learning. The
bottom left comer of the space is anomalous comparisons, which share no significant attribute or relational
commonalties. Finally, Figure 1 shows that metaphors
span the range from relational comparisons (e.g. ''two
lovers like twin compasses'') to attribute comparisons
(e.g., "a moon like a silver coin").

48

Figure 1
.
Similarity Space, Showing Diffe;rent Kmds of M~tches
in Terms of the Degree of Relattonal Versus ObtectDescription Overlap

AnakJgyl

Re/alloMI
metaphor

Oob!Jall)

-

,.,.,.,•P•••-'

llefl

(..,.,)

Attributes shared

Process Model of Alignment ancl Mapping:
The Structure-Mapping Engine
We have argued that the comparison process involves a
rather sophisticated process of structural alignment and
mapping over rich complex representations. A skeptical
reader might justifiably inquire at this point whether there
is any plausible real-time mechanism that could compute
such a structural alignment. This problem is not trivial,
and some early models made the assumption that the toplevel conclusion or goal of the analogy was known in
advance to ease the computational burden (Greiner, 1988;
Holyoak, 1985; see Gentner & Clement, 1988, for a discussion). However, these solutions are limited, because
people can process analogies without advance knowledge
of their meaning. When you read ''Philosophy is language idling,'' you probably understand its meaning without a prior goal context (although a relevant prior context
would of course facilitate comprehension). Thus, a process model of comparison should be able to operate without advance knowledge of the final interpretation.
The structure-mapping engine (SME; Falkenhainer
et al., 1986, 1989; Forbus, Gentner, & Law, 1995) uses a
local-to-global alignment process to arrive at a structural
alignment of two representations. 4 Figure 2 shows SME' s
three stages of mapping. In the first stage, SME begins
blind and local by matching all identical predicates and
subpredicates in the two representations. 5 This initial
4
Similar algorithms have been incorporated into other computational models of analogy (Burstein, 1988; Goldstone, I994b; Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Keane, Ledgeway, &
Duff, 1994).
5
We make the theoretical assumption that similarity of relational
predicates can be expressed as partial identity. The idea is that when
two situations are analogous, they must have some system of identical
relations. This identicality applies to the underlying concepts; the actual
surface words used to express the relation need not be identical, for
example, "Jupiter travels slower than Mercury" is analogous to "Jupiter moves slower than Mercury" or "Jupiter's rate of motion is lower
than Mercury's" (see Gentner & Clement, 1988).

January 1997 • American Psychologist

I

I. CAUSE [TRAVEL (motive power, sun, earth), REVOLVE
AROUND (earth, sun)]
2. CAUSE [TRAVEL (motive power, earth, moon), REVOLVE
AROUND (moon, earth)].

Figure 2

Overview of the Algorithm Used by the

Structure-Mapping Engine

~
Local matches

~
Structural
coalescence
Into consistent
mappings

Pit
~

Sllgtl
Small structuras
combined into
maximal lnterpratation;
candidate lnferances

·.·,

t

f'

i
~

~

t

mapping is typically inconsistent, contammg many-toone matches. In the second phase, these local matches are
coalesced into structurally consistent connected clusters
(called kernals). Finally, in the third stage, these kemals
are merged into one or a few maximal structurally consistent interpretations (i.e., mappings displaying one-to-one
correspondences and parallel connectivity). SME then
produces a structural evaluation of the interpretation(s),
using a kind of cascade-like algorithm in which evidence
is passed down from predicates to their arguments. This
method favors deep systems over shallow systems, even
if they have equal numbers of matches (Forbus & Gentner,
1989). Finally, predicates connected to the common
structure in the base, but not initially present in the target,
are proposed as candidate inferences in the target. Thus,
structural completion can lead to spontaneous unplanned
inferences.
SME has the psychologically appealing feature that
it can derive more than one interpretation for an analogy.
It normally produces two or three best interpretations of
an analogy-that is, interpretations receiving the highest
structural evaluations. For example, suppose we asked
SME to interpret another of Kepler's analogical conjectures, namely, that the earth might impel the moon just
as the sun does the earth:
January 1997 • American Psychologist

L_

Given this cross-mapped pair, SME would produce a relational interpretation in which the earth in Sentence 1
corresponds to the moon in Sentence 2, as well as an
object-based interpretation in which the earth corresponds to the earth. Because of its preference for deeply
connected relational structure, the relational interpretation would receive a higher structural evaluation and
would win over the object interpretation.
A good explanatory analogy can often be extended,
as in Kepler's analogical extensions. Computational models have tried to capture this propensity with the notion
of incremental mapping. For example, SME can extend
an existing analogical mapping by adding further connected material from the base domain (either drawn from
current context or from long-term memory [Forbus, Ferguson, & Gentner, 1994; see also Burstein, 1988; Keane,
Ledgeway, & Duff, 1994]). These models operate on the
assumption (which we discuss later) that extending a
connected mapping is easier than creating a new
mapping.

Structure Mapping at Work
Commonalities and DiHerences
The experience of comparison is selective: Only certain
commonalities are highlighted. We have suggested that
a central factor controlling what information is considered in a comparison is systematicity: the presence of
higher order connections between lower order relations
(Clement & Gentner, 1991; Forbus & Gentner, 1989;
Gentner, 1983). For example, comparing the pictures in
Figure 3A and 3B highlights the commonality that both
show a child looking at a pet. In contrast, comparing
Figure 3A with 3C highlights the commonality that both
show an animal being frightened by another animal
(Markman & Gentner, in press). In both cases, the information highlighted by the comparison forms a connected
relational system, and commonalities not connected to
the matching system (such as the fact that there are dressers in both 3A and 3B) seem to recede in importance.
This pattern has also been demonstrated using passages
(Clement & Gentner, 1991). In this study, people who
were given analogous stories judged that corresponding
sentences were more important when the corresponding
sentence pairs were part of a matching relational system
than when they were not.
More surprisingly, structural alignment also influences what differences are psychologically salient. For
example, when comparing Figure 3A and 3B, we notice
that it is a snake that the boy is looking at in one picture
and a fish in the other. Both the snake and the fish play
the same role in the matching structure. Differences that
are connected to the common system (like the fish-snake
difference) we call alignable differences (Gentner &
Markman, 1994; Markman & Gentner, 1993b, 1996).
49

Figure 3
The Role of Commonalities and Differences in
Similarity

Note. This triad of pictures demonstrates that commonalities become important
when they are part of a matching system and that differences become important
when they are related to the commonalities.

Alignable differences can be contrasted with nonalignable differences, which are aspects of one situation
that have no correspondence at all in the other situation.
For example, in the comparison of Figures 3A and 3B, the
dog in Figure 3A has no correspondence with anything in
Figure 3B, and hence it is a nonalignable difference.
Just as commonalities gain in importance when they
are part of a matching system, so too do differences. That
is, alignable differences are more salient than nonalignable differences. Intuitively, this focus on alignable
differences makes sense, for it leads to a focus on those
differences that are relevant to the common causal or
goal structure that spans the situations. However, if we
follow this logic a few steps further, we arrive at the
rather intriguing prediction that there should be more
salient differences for high-similar than for low-similar
pairs (because in general, high-similarity pairs will have
50

larger common systems and more alignable differences).
For example, if you imagine listing all possible differences for the pair hotel-motel and contrast that with
listing all possible differences for the pair magazinekitten, you will probably find that it is much easier to
list differences for the first, high-similarity pair. Experimental results bear out this observation. Participants who
were asked to list differences between hotel and motel
readily listed (alignable) differences: "Hotels are in
cities, motels are on the highway"; "you stay longer in
hotels than in motels''; ''hotels have many floors, motels
only one or two''; and so on. When given a low-similarity
pair like magazine-kitten, participants tended to list nonalignable differences, such as ''You pet a kitten, you
don't pet a magazine," or "kittens have fur and magazines don't." This finding of a greater number of
alignable differences for high-similarity pairs has been
obtained in empirical studies involving both word pairs
(Markman & Gentner, 1993b; Markman & Wisniewski,
in press) and picture pairs (Markman & Gentner, 1996).
An informal observation is that participants often expressed confusion or irritation over the low-similarity
pairs, perhaps reflecting their feeling that it makes no
sense to talk about differences in the absence of a meaningful alignment.
If the comparison process focuses on alignable differences rather than on nonalignable differences, then
alignable differences should be listed more fluently than
nonalignable differences. This means that people should
find it easier to list differences for pairs of similar items
than for pairs of dissimilar items, because high-similarity
pairs have many commonalties and, hence, many
alignable differences. Such a prediction runs against the
commonsense view-and the most natural prediction of
feature-intersection models-that it should be easier to
list differences the more of them there are to list-that
is, the more dissimilar the two items are. In a study by
Gentner and Markman (1994), participants were given
a page containing 40 word pairs, half similar and half
dissimilar, and were given five minutes to list one difference for as many different pairs as they could. They were
told that they would not have time to do all 40 pairs,
and so they should do the easiest pairs first. The results
provided strong evidence for the alignability predictions:
Participants listed many more differences for similar
pairs (M = 11.4) than for dissimilar pairs (M = 5.9).
Furthermore, this difference was concentrated in the
alignable differences. Over twice as many alignable differences were given for similar pairs (M = 9.0) than for
dissimilar pairs (M = 3.9).
Because people focus on alignable differences rather
than on nonalignable differences when making comparisons, alignable differences have a greater impact on people's perception of similarity than do nonalignable differences. Thus, all else being equal, alignable differences
count more against similarity than nonalignable differences. One way to test this prediction is to pit comparisons involving a given alignable difference against comparisons involving the same contrast as a nonalignable
January 1997 • American Psychologist

fi.gure4
.The Importance of A/ignoble and Nona/ignoble Differences in Similarity

I

Nonalignable difference choice

Alignable difference choice

Nole. This is a forced-choice triad used to demonstrate that alignable differences decrease similarity more than do nonalignable differences. Reprinted from
"Commonalities and Differences in Similarity Comparisons," by A. B. Markman and D. Gentner, 1996, Memory & Cognition, 24, p. 243. Copyright 1996 by the
..Psychonomic Society.

dHferc~nce. For example, in the top figure of the triad in

the man shoots an arrow at a target. In the
not~lgnlab.te-c:lltlterc~nc:e option, the man shoots an arrow
but there is also a bird (a nonalignable differin the picture. In the alignable-difference option,
the man shoots an arrow at a bird (an alignable difference); the target has been moved to the tree behind the
When asked which option is most similar to the
.target, participants chose the nonalignable-difference option, suggesting that the alignable difference decreased
the similarity of the pair more than did the nonalignable
difference (Markman & Gentner, 1996).6
In summary, the process of structural alignment
leads to a focus on matching relational systems. This
focus determines both which commonalities are salient
and which differences are salient. This last may seem
paradoxical: Why should the common alignment determine which differences are important? Yet, if we reflect
that most pairs of items in the world are dissimilar, this
pattern seems functionally sensible. Intuitively, it is when
a pair of items is similar that their differences are likely
to be important.
~IG9icalln~~nce

Analogies can lead to new inferences, as Kepler's ( 1609/
1992) example demonstrates, and the same is true of
January 1997 • American Psychologist

similarity comparisons. As in analogy, when there is a
match between a base and target domain, facts about the
base domain that are connected to the matching information may be proposed as candidate inferences (Falkenhainer et al., 1986, 1989). For example, imagine you have
a friend with a sarcastic sense of humor that makes her
difficult to get along with but a helpful temperament that
wins her the loyalty of her friends. If you met a new
person and discovered that he had a sarcastic sense of
humor, then based on his similarity to your other friend,
you would probably be more willing to suppose that he
is difficult to get along with than to infer that he has a
helpful temperament that wins him loyal friends.
This point was demonstrated in a study by Clement
and Gentner (1991). They asked people to read pairs of
analogous stories. The base story had two key facts, each
of which was connected to a causal antecedent. Neither
of these key facts was stated in the target story. However,
the target story did have a fact that corresponded to one
of the causal antecedents from the base. When participants were given the analogy and asked to make a new
6
In the triad in Figure 4, the manipulation of alignable- and nonalignable-difference options also involves moving the target, which
could be a confound. See Markman and Gentner (1996) for another
variant of the study that escapes this problem.

51

\~.-~!~
.·
":'r7~..,.·

I

1

'
prediction about the target story, they predicted the key
fact that was connected to the matching causal antecedent
more than twice as often as they predicted the other key
fact. Convergent findings have been obtained by Read
(1984), Spellman and Holyoak (in press), and Markman
(1996). Likewise, Lassaline (1996) showed that people's
willingness to infer new facts in a category-induction
task increased when these facts were connected to shared
causal relations. These results show how structural alignment and mapping allow people to predict new information from old.

Connectivity and Asymmetry
People often find comparisons much more similar in one
direction than the other, as Tversky ( 1977) noted in his
seminal treatise on similarity. For example, we prefer ''A
scanner is like a copy machine'' to ''A copy machine is
like a scanner." As Tversky pointed out, this directionality is at odds with the pervasive intuition that similarity
is a symmetric relation (after all, if A is similar to B,
then shouldn't B be equally similar to A?). Structure
mapping offers a natural explanation: We propose that
asymmetries typically arise when one of the comparison
items is more systematic than the other (Bowdle & Gentner, 1996; Gentner & Bowdle, 1994). According to structure-mapping theory, inferences are projected from the
base to the target. Thus, having the more systematic and
coherent item as the base maximizes the amount of information that can be mapped from base to target. Consistent
with this claim, Bowdle and Gentner found that when
participants were given pairs of passages varying in their
causal coherence, they (a) consistently preferred comparisons in which the more coherent passage was the base
and the less coherent passage was the target, (b) generated
more inferences from the more coherent passage to the
less coherent one, and (c) rated comparisons with more
coherent bases as more informative than the reverse
comparisons.

Extended Mapping
One particularly interesting use of analogy is in extended
mappings. They arise in creative thinking, as when Kepler
explored the implications of analogies between the motive power and light or magnetism. Extended analogies
are used in instruction as well: for example, when electric
current and voltage are described in terms of water flow
and pressure (Gentner & Gentner, 1983). They also arise
in ordinary language, with metaphoric systems like
"Marriage is a journey" that can be extended (e.g., "You
have to slog through the rough spots but eventually the
road will get smoother'' [Gibbs, 1994; Lakoff & Johnson,
1980]. We have found, consistent with the structuremapping account, that it is easier to extend an existing
domain mapping than to initiate a new one [Boronat &
Gentner, 1996; Gentner & Boronat, 1992]). People who
read passages containing extended metaphors one sentence at a time were faster to read the final sentence
when it was a consistent extension of the metaphor of the
passage, as in Example A (below), than when it utilized a
52

'

different metaphor, as in Example B (below). For example, one passage described a debate in terms of a race:
A. Dan saw the big debate as a race. . . . He knew that he had

to steer his course carefully in the competition. His strategy
was to go cruising through the initial points and then make his
move. . . . He revved up as he made his last key points. His
skill left his opponent far behind him at the finish line.
B. Dan saw the big debate as a war.... He knew that he had
to use every weapon at his command in the competition. He
mapped out his strategy to ensure that he established a dominant position. . . . He intensified the bombardment as he made
his last key points. His skill left his opponent far behind him
at the finish line.
If extending an existing connected mapping is easier than

creating a new mapping, then people should be faster to
read the final sentence in Example A than in Example
B. This is exactly what happened. This finding fits with
the computational notion of incremental mapping, in
which metaphoric passages can be understood by adding
to an initial mapping (Forbus et al., 1994; Keane et al.,
1994). Interestingly, this result held only for novel metaphors and not for conventional metaphors. It is possible
that conventional metaphors have their metaphoric meanings stored lexically, making it unnecessary to carry out
a domain mapping (Bowdle & Gentner, 1996; Gentner &
Wolff, 1996).

Connectivity and Pure Mapping
Learners are often called on to map information from
one situation to another. For example, when we buy a
new VCR, climb into a rental car, or fire up an update
of Windows, we must decide which aspects of our prior
knowledge apply to the new situation. To study the determinants of this mapping process, Gentner and Schumacher (1986; Schumacher & Gentner, 1988) taught participants how to pilot a ship using a simulated device
panel. A game-like task was used in which participants
could directly manipulate certain parameters (such as engine thrust or coolant valve opening) that controlled other
parameters (such as velocity or engine temperature). If
they performed correctly, the ship made port in time;
otherwise, they lost the game. After the first device had
been well learned, participants were transferred to a second analogous device panel, and the number of trials to
reach criterion on the new panel was measured. Participants' speed of learning was affected both by transparency-participants learned the new panel faster when
there were physical resemblances between structurally
corresponding elements-and by systematicity-participants learned the new panel faster when they had
learned a causal explanation for the procedures.
Consistent with these patterns, both Ross ( 1987,
1989) and Reed (1987) have found transparency effects.
They have shown that participants are better at transferring algebraic solutions when corresponding base and
target objects are similar. Reed measured the transparency of the mapping between two analogous algebra
problems by asking participants to identify pairs of correJanuary 1997 • American Psychologist

I

Tim does not mean that he too is going to pay for Shelley's beer (the nonanalogical interpretation), nor even
that he too is going to pay for his own beer, but rather
that he is going to pay for what in his situation best
corresponds to Shelley's beer: namely, his coke. This
ability to carry out fluent, apparently effortless, structural
alignment and mapping is a hallmark of human cognitive
processing.

various ways. The greater the surface similarity between
the probe and a target in memory (in terms of shared
objects and characters), the more likely the target was to
be retrieved. In contrast, the greater the degree of shared
higher order relational structure (such as shared causal
structure), the higher the rated inferential soundness and
similarity of the pair. Thus, the kind of similarity that
most reliably led to remindings was not the kind participants most valued in making inferences. In fact, participants often rated their own remindings as low in both
soundness and similarity.
Findings like this suggest that similarity is pluralistic (Gentner, 1989; Goldstone, 1994a; Medin et al., 1993).
Indeed, a parallel disassociation has been found in problem-solving transfer: Retrieval likelihood is sensitive to
surface similarity, whereas likelihood of successful problem solving is sensitive to structural similarity (Keane,
1988; Ross, 1987, 1989; but see Hammond, Seifert, &
Gray, 1991 ). This suggests that different kinds of similarity may have different psychological roles in transfer.
The simulation "Many are called-but few are chosen"
(MAC-FAC; Forbus et al., 1995) models this phenomenon with a two-stage system: The first stage (MAC) is
an indiscriminate, computationally cheap search for any
kinds of similarities in memory, and the second stage
(FAC) carries out a structure mapping of the candidates
from the first stage.
Another way in which similarity is pluralistic is that
different kinds of similarity emerge at different points
in processing. Response deadline studies of relational
comparisons suggest that when participants are required
to respond quickly (under 700 ms or under 1,000 ms,
depending on the task and materials), they base their
sense of similarity on local matches (even cross-mapped
object matches) rather than on relational matches (Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Ratcliff & McKoon, 1989). At
longer response deadlines. this pattern is reversed. This
time course of similarity has been successfully modeled
for processing features conjoined into objects by Goldstone and Medin's (1994) Similarity, Interactive Activation, and Mapping (SIAM) model, using a local-to-global
process like that of SME. Overall, the difference between
early and late processing seems to be a shift from local
matches to global structural alignment.

Plurality of Similarity

Implications for Other Cognitive Processes

We have reviewed evidence that similarity is a process
of structural alignment and mapping over articulated representations. However, similarity does not always appear
so structurally discerning. A particularly striking case
occurs in similarity-based retrieval. Several findings s~g­
gest that similarity-based retrieval from long-term mel_llory is based on overall similarity, with surface similarity
heavily weighted, rather than by the kind of stiilCtllral
alignment that best supports inference (Gentner, 1989;
Holyoak & Koh, 1987; Keane, 1988; Ross, 1989; Seifert,
McKoon, Abelson, & Ratcliff, 1986). For example, Gentner et al. (1993) gave participants a memory set of stories
and later probed them with stories that were similar in

Categorization. Structural alignment and mapping
can provide insight into other cognitive processes (see
Figure 5). As one example, similarity is often given a
central role in categorization (Hampton, 1995; Rosch,
1975; Smith & Medin, 1981). It is common to assume
that objects can be categorized on the basis of perceptual,
behavioral, or functional commonalities with the category representation (e.g., robins are seen as birds because
of their perceptual and behavioral similarity to a prototype bird or to many other birds that have been encountered). However, many researchers have pointed out cases
in which rated similarity and probability of category
membership are dissociated (Gelman & Wellman, 1991;

sponding concepts. He found that transparency was a
goOd predictor of their ability to notice and apply solutions from one problem to the other. Ross (1989) found
that participants' ability to transfer the problem-solving
solution correctly was disrupted when cross-mapped correspondences were used. Research with children shows
early effects of transparency and somewhat later effects
of systematicity (Gentner & Toupin, 1986). We suspect
that to derive the benefits of systematic explanations may
require possessing some degree of domain knowledge.
Three generalizations emerge from the transfer studies. First, transparency makes analogical mapping easier.
Close, literal similarity matches are the easiest sort of
mapping and the kind for which participants are least
likely to make errors. Second, possessing a systematic
higher order structure can permit transfer even under adverse transparency conditions. Having a strong causal
model can enable a learner to transfer even when the
objects mismatch perceptually. A third point, on which
we expand below, is that different kinds of similarity
may enter into different subprocesses of transfer.

Further Implications
Ubiquity of Alignment

I

Our structure-mapping abilities constitute a rather remarkable talent. In creative thinking, analogies serve to
biglilight-important commonalities, to project inferences,
and to suggest new ways to represent the domains. Yet,
it would be wrong to think of_ analogy as esoteric, the
property of geniuses. On the contrary, we often take analogy for granted, as in examples like the following from
Hofstadter (1995, p. 76).
Shelley: I'm going to pay for my beer now.
Tim: Me, too [Tim had a coke.]

January 1997 • American Psychologist

53

Figure 5
Some Uses of Comparison in Cognitive Processing
Alignment and mapping processes are used in
perceiving similarity

A~
perceiving differences

~
cetegorizing
(selecting best match from memory)

~?:A

£'A

~

~

}potential
cetegory
abstractions

discovering new category
(abstracting common system)

Keil, 1989; Rips, 1989). For example, bats have the perceptual and behavioral characteristics of birds (they are
similar to birds in this sense), but they are classified
as mammals, because of important (though nonobvious)
properties, such as giving birth to live young. On the
basis of examples like this, similarity's role in categorization has been challenged; it has been argued that category
membership judgments are theory based rather than similarity based (Keil, 1989; Murphy & Medin, 1985).
The process of alignment and mapping points the
way to a reconciliation of similarity-based and theorybased accounts (see also Goldstone, 1994a). If we focus
purely on perceptual similarity among objects, we are
led to conclude that bats should be categorized with
birds. On this view, theory-based knowledge (such as
why bats are mammals) must intervene from elsewhere
to overrule this assignment. However, if the similarity
computation is assumed to be that of structural alignment,
then the similarity between two instances will be based
not only on object-level commonalities but also on com54

mon relations such as common causal relations and common origins. Assuming that our representations include
information about theory-based relations, such as that
bats bear live young, as well as information about features, then the schism between similarity-based and theory-based categorization may be more apparent than real.
Developmentally, if we assume that theoretical
knowledge is acquired gradually, this view would account
for the characteristic-to-defining shift (Keil & Batterman,
1984) in children's interpretations of word meaning from
local object features (e.g., a taxi is bright yellow and
has a checkered sign) to deeper relational commonalities
(e.g., a taxi is a vehicle that may be hired to transport
people).
Choice and clecision. Structural alignment also
sheds light on the processes underlying choice behavior.
Medin, Goldstone, and Markman (1995) reviewed parallels between phenomena in decision processing and phenomena in comparison processing that suggest an important role for structural alignment in decision making.
Structural alignment influences which features to pay
attention to in choice options. Research suggests that
alignable differences are given more weight in choice
situations than are nonalignable differences (Lindemann & Markman, 1996; Markman & Medin, 1995;
Sloyic & MacPhillamy, 1974). For example, Markman
and Medin (1995) asked participants to choose between
video games and to justify their choices. Their justifications were more likely to contain alignable differences
than nonalignable differences. As another example, Kahneman and Tversky ( 1984) described to participants a
hypothetical store in which a jacket could be bought for
$125 and a calculator for $15. They offered participants
the opportunity to go to another store and save $5 on the
total purchase. Participants who were offered a jacket for
$125 and a calculator for $10 were more willing to make
the effort to go to another store than those offered a
jacket for $120 and a calculator for $15. Even though
the monetary reward for going to the other store was the
same for both groups, participants were influenced by
the alignable difference.

Conclusions
Comparison processes foster insight. They highlight
commonalities and relevant differences, they invite new
inferences, and they promote new ways of construing
situations. This creative potential is easiest to notice when
the domains compared are very different, as in Kepler's
analogies or John Donne's metaphors. But even prosaic
similarity comparisons can lead to insights. Sometimes
these insights are so obvious that we might fail to notice
them, as when two-year-old Lucas noticed the repeated
pattern of keys opening doors; Or Aaron (in Holyoak &
Thagard's article, 1997) spontaneously switched roles in
the kiss-and-make-better schema; or when a six-year-old
realized that tulips must need water, because people do
(lnagaki & Hatano, 1987). At first glance, these mundane
examples might seem to have nothing in common with
the bold analogies of scientific discovery. But let us close
January 1997 • American Psychologist

..
with our own analogy. Analogies are like comets, flashing
through our awareness and riveting our attention. Literal
similarity is like planetary motion: steady, predictable,
and prosaic. But the planets are central to the behavior
of the solar system, and (like literal similarity comparisons) they are always with us. Finally, both planets and
comets are governed by the same fundamental laws.
REFERENCES
Andersen, S.M., & Cole, S. W. (1990). "Do I know you?": The role
of significant others in general social perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 384-399.
Bassok, M. (1990). Transfer of domain-specific problem-solving procedures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
· Cognition, 16, 522-533.
Boronat, C., & Gentner, D. (1996). Metaphors are (sometimes) processed as generative domain mappings. Manuscript in preparation.
Bowdle, B. F., & Gentner, D. (1996). lnformativity and asymmetry in
similarity. Manuscript in preparation.
Burstein, M. H. (1988). Incremental learning from multiple analogies.
In A. Prieditis (Ed.), Analogica (pp. 37 -62). Los Altos, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Copernicus, N. (1992). De revolutionibus orbium caelestium (Edward
Rosen, Trans.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. (Original
work published 1543)
Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a selection
constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive Science, 15, 89 -132.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1986). The structuremapping engine. In Proceedings of the fifth national conference on
artificial intelligence (pp. 272-277). Los Altos, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The structuremapping engine: Algorithm and examples. Artificial Intelligence, 41,
1-63.
Forbus, K. D., Ferguson, R. W., & Gentner, D. (1994). Incremental
structure-mapping. In A. Ram & K. Eisel! (Eds.), Proceedings of the
sixteenth annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
313-318). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). Structural evaluation of analogies:
What counts? In The proceedings of the eleventh annual conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 341-348). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC: A model of
similarity-based retrievaL Cognitive Science, 19, 141-205.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and essences: Early
understandings of the non-obvious. Cognition, 38, 213-244.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for
analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp.
199-241). London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Boronat, C. B. (1992). Metaphors are (sometimes) processed as generative domain-mappings. Unpublished manuscript.
Gentner, D., & Bowdle, B. F. ( 1994). The coherence imbalance hypothesis: A functional approach to asymmetry in comparison. In A. Ram &
K. Eiselt (Eds.), The sixteenth annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 351- 356). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., Brem, S., Ferguson, R., Markman, A. B., Levidow, B. B.,
Wolff, P., & Forbus, K. D. (in press). Conceptual change via analogical reasoning: A case study of Johannes Kepler. Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Gentner, D., & Clement, C. (1988). Evidence for relational selectivity
in the interpretation of analogy and metaphor. In G. H. Bower (Ed.),
The psychology of learning and motivation (pp. 307 -358). San Francisco: Academic Press.
Gentner, D., & Gentner, D. R. (1983). Flowing waters or teeming
crowds: Mental models of electricity. In D. Gentner & A. L. Stevens
(Eds.), Mental models (pp. 99-129). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1993). Analogy- Watershed or Water-

I

January 1997 • American Psychologist

loo? Structural alignment and the development of connectionist models of analogy. In S. J. Hanson, J. D. Cowan, & C. L. Giles (Eds.),
Advances in neural information processing systems 5 (pp. 855-862).
San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural alignment in comparison: No difference without similarity. Psychological Science, 5,
152-158.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1995). Similarity is like analogy. In
C. Cacciari (Ed.), Similarity (pp. 111-148). Brussels, Belgium:
BREPOLS.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the career of
similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J.P. Byrnes (Eds.), Perspectives on
thought and language: Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277).
London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993). The roles
of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability from inferential
soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Gentner, D., & Schumacher, R. M. (1986). Use of structure mapping
theory for complex systems. In Proceedings of the 19861EEE international conference on systems, man, and cybernetics (pp. 252258). New York: IEEE.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface similarity
in the development of analogy. Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (1996). Metaphor and knowledge change. In A.
Kasher & Y. Shen (Eds. ), Cognitive aspects of metaphor: Structure,
comprehension and use. Manuscript in preparation.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994 ). The poetics of mind. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994a). The role of similarity in categorization: Providing a groundwork. Cognition, 52, 125-157.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994b). Similarity, interactive activation, and mapping. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 20, 3-28.
Goldstone, R. L., & Medin, D. L. (1994). The time course of comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 20, 29-50.
Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Gentner, D. (1991). Relational similarity and the non-independence of features in similarity judgments.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 222-262.
Goodman, N. (1972). Problems and prospects. Indianapolis, IN: BobbsMerrill.
Greiner, R. (1988). Learning by understanding analogies. Artificial Intelligence, 35, 81-125.
Hammond, K. J., Seifert, C. M., & Gray, K. C. (1991). Functionality
in analogical transfer: A hard match is good to find. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 1, 111-152.
Hampton, J. A. (1995). Testing the prototype theory of concepts. Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 686-708.
Hofstadter, D. ( 1995). Fluid concepts and creative analogies. New York:
Basic Books.
Holyoak, K. J. (1985). The pragmatics of analogical transfer. In G. H.
Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances
in research and theory (pp. 59-87). New York: Academic Press.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural similarity in
analogical transfer. Memory and Cognition. 15. 332-340.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by constraint
satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1997). The analogical mind. American
Psychologist, 52, 35-44.
Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (1987). Young children's spontaneous personification as analogy. Child Development, 58, 1013-1020.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing reality
to its alternatives. Psychological Review, 93, 136-153.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and frames.
American Psychologist, 39, 341-350.
Keane, M. T. (1988). Analogical mechanisms. Artificial Intelligence
Review, 2, 229-250.
Keane, M. T., Ledgeway, T., & Duff, S. (1994). Constraints on analogical mapping: A comparison of three models. Cognitive Science, 18,
387-438.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds and cognitive development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

55

I

I

Keil, F. C., & Batterman, N. (1984). A characteristic-to-defining shift
in the development of word meaning. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 23, 221-236.
Kepler, J. (1992). The new astronomy (W. H. Donahue. Trans.). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. (Origi!}al work published 1609)
Kolodner, J. (1993). Case-based reasoning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lassaline, M. E. (1996). Structural alignment in induction and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 754-770.
Lindemann, P. G., & Markman, A. B. (1996). Alignability and attribute
importance in choice. In G. Cottrell (Ed.), Proceedings of the eighteenth annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 358363). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Markman, A. B. (1996). Constraints on analogical inference. Manuscript in preparation.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993a). Splitting the differences: A
structural alignment view of similarity. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 517-535.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993b). Structural alignment during
similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and differences
in similarity comparisons. Memory & Cognition, 24, 235-249.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (in press). The effects of alignability
on memory. Psychological Science.
Markman, A. B., & Medin, D. L. (1995). Similarity and alignment in
choice. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
63, 117-130.
Markman, A. B., & Wisniewski, E. J. (in press). Similar and different:
The differentiation of basic level categories. Journal of Experimental

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993). Respects for
similarity. Psychological Review, 100, 254-278.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Markman, A. B. (1995). Comparison
and choice: Relations between similarity processing and decision
processing. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 2, 1-19.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289-315.
Novick, L. R. ( 1988). Analogical transfer, problem similarity and expertise. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 14, 510-520.

56

Novick, L. R. (1990). Representational transfer in problem solving.
Psychological Science, 1, 128-132.
Palmer, S. E. (1978). Fundamental aspects of cognitive representation.
In E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization (pp.
259-303). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1989). Similarity information versus relational information: Differences in the time course of retrieval. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 139-155.
Read, S. J. (1984). Analogical reasoning in social judgment: The importance of causal theories. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 14-25.
Reed, S. K. (1987). A structure-mapping model for word problems.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 124-139.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization. InS. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp.
21-59). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 192-233.
Ross, B. H. ( 1987). This is like that: The use of earlier problems and the;
separation of similarity effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Ross, B. H. ( 1989). Distinguishing types of superficial similarities: Different effects on the access and use of earlier examples. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,
456-468.
Schumacher, R. M., & Gentner, D. (1988). Remembering causal systems: Effects of systematicity and surface similarity in delayed transfer. In Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 32nd annual me~t­
ing (pp. 1271-1275). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors Society.
Seifert, C. M., McKoon, G., Abelson, R. P., & Ratcliff, R. (1986).
Memory connection between thematically similar episodes. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12,
220-231.
Slovic, P., & MacPhillamy, D. (1974). Dimensional commensurability
and cue utilization in comparative judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 11, 172-194.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Spellman, B. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (in press). Pragmatics in analogical
mapping. Cognitive Psychology.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84,
327-352.
Winston, P. H. ( 1980). Learning and reasoning by analogy. Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, 23, 689-703.

January 1997 • American Psychologist

